Add features spec for Resource extensibility (#58)
radius-project/design-notes: resources/resource-extensbility/2024-06-resource-extensibility-feature-spec.md

We need to enable the open-source community to build and experiment with imperfect things. We need to provide an extensibility model that supports “Bring your own technology”, define and use it with Radius. This will help us to meet the community where they are and enable them to experiment and leverage their work as open-source contributions.

One of the high value extensibility points in Radius is Recipes. We have received interests to create custom resource types, define Recipes for the custom resource types and use it in the Radius application. Today Radius Extenders helps in creating custom resource types, but they are untyped and have limitations. The goal of providing resource extensibility is to empower developers or infrastructure operators to author and run their applications with custom resource types seamlessly in Radius and use all the other features such as Recipes, connections and app graph with ease and flexibility.

> 

Reviewer: Not sure if I shared this with you, but there's plenty of good context here as well: https://tag-app-delivery.cncf.io/whitepapers/platform-eng-maturity-model/

### Top level goals
1. Enable users to author their applications with custom resource types in Radius without having to write Go code to integrate with Radius components and deploy their application seamlessly.
2. Automatically enable Radius features such as Recipes, Connections, App graph, rad CLI for custom resource types.
3. Enable users to contribute and open-source the custom resource types and recipes to the community. This will accelerate the adoption of Radius across the cloud native community.
4. Radius uses the resource extensibility framework to refactor its already built in resource types.

### Non-goals (out of scope)

> 

Reviewer: Anything to say here? Defining some things as out-of-scope or non-goals helps draw the boundaries clearly.

> ## Customer profile and challenges

Reviewer: Can you do a find and replace to update all uses of customer to user? Open source projects don't have customers.

Author: updated

- IT Operators: IT operators are responsible for managing the infrastructure and ensuring that the applications are running smoothly. They are responsible for maintaining the infrastructure and providing support for the infrastructure. They are the primary users of Radius Recipes as they are responsible for defining the infrastructure-as-code templates for the applications.

- System Reliability Engineers (SREs) : SREs are responsible for ensuring the reliability of the applications and services that are deployed in the cloud. They are responsible for maintaining the infrastructure and ensuring that the applications are running smoothly. They maintain the infrastructure-as-code templates and provide support for the applications that are deployed. 

- System integrators : System integrators are partners who help enterprises integrate proprietary services with cloud native applications. They are responsible for designing and building cloud native applications on behalf of their customers.

- Developers : Developers are responsible for building the cloud native applications. They are responsible for writing the code, designing and maintaining the applications.

> - Open-source contributors : Cloud native open-source contributors can be any of the above personas who are interested in contributing to the cloud native projects. 

Reviewer: ❤️ - I love that we're pointing out the OSS aspects for all of the above personas.

## Key dependencies and risks
<!-- What dependencies must we take in order to enable this scenario? -->

<!-- What other risks are you aware of that need to be mitigated. If you have a mitigation in mind, summarize here. -->
<!-- **Dependency Name** – summary of dependency.  Issues/concerns/risks with this dependency -->
<!-- **Risk Name** – summary of risk.  Mitigation plan if known. If it is not yet known, no problem. --> 

- Dependency: Bicep compiler merge support
    - We need to ensure that the ongoing Bicep compiler merge work is complete so that custom resource types can be dynamically generated for the user defined resource types.
    - Mitigation: Work closely with the Bicep team to ensure that the merge is completed on time and that the necessary features are available to enable custom resource types in Radius .

> - Risk: Adoption and community engagement

Reviewer: To make this risk a bit more **pointy** ... if it's too complex or not powerful enough it's going to hinder adoption.

- Risk: Security and trust
    - Allowing users to contribute custom resource types introduces potential security risks and the need to establish trust in the community-contributed code.
    - Mitigation: Implement strict security measures, such as code reviews and vulnerability scanning, and establish a transparent review process for community contributions.

## Key assumptions to test and questions to answer
<!-- If you are making assumptions that, if incorrect, would cause us to significantly alter our approach to this scenario, make them explicit here.  Also call out how / when you plan to validate key assumptions. -->
<!-- What big questions must we answer in order to clarify our plan for this scenario.  When and how do you plan to answer those questions (prototype feature x, customer research, competitive research, etc) -->

- Assumption: Users will find value in the extensibility feature and actively contribute to the community.
- Assumption: Users will use extensibility in lieu of existing extenders because they want to take advantage of things like strong typing and validation in Radius

## Current state 

> <!-- If we already have some ongoing investment in this area, summarize the current state and point to any relevant documents. -->

Reviewer: Would be a great to place to talk about what's in Radius today, and where the gaps are. eg: extender is good as a workaround but doesn't fulfil the promise of platform engineering.

Reviewer: Nevermind, I see that's below. Leaving this in so you can see that I think it was a good inclusion.

| Specify the contract for the key services in the application platform | Author a schema for the custom resources easily with auto guidance tools | Simple tools that enables the schema authoring, uniformity and consistency |
| Iterating and testing the application platform | Providing a productive inner loop for development and testing  | Simple and easy way to iterate on changes, test and deploy them |
| Ship the custom platform | Registering the API's to the platform, providing documentation, onboarding and support | intuitive, seamless, collaborative |
| Maintain the custom platform | Versioning and maintaining the API's | Ease of support, sense of ownership (decision making) | 
| Support for compliance and security | Compatibility and security policies | Trust the platform |
| Open-source custom resources | Repository and pipeline to validate, testing the infrastructure and publishing  | Desire to contribute, easy to use, low overhead /dependency to publish |

As an IT operator and developer trying to build and maintain the application, I have the following jobs to be done and requirements to meet:

> #### Main job : Use the custom platform to build and maintain the application

Reviewer: It looks like this includes the recipes as part of "use the platform". I'm still not sure about that... The recipes feel a little more like they are part of "build the platform". Not a super strong opinion.

Author: Moved it to as a separate job to avoid confusion.

*Community supported assets meets their requirements* : Enterprises have a wide range of requirements for their applications based on the nature of the application, market, region, hosting models,compliance and security policies. Radius can enable the community to provide and use the resource type definitions and IaC templates that meet the requirements of the enterprises and meet them where they are. This will enable customers to build what they want via Radius thus unblocking them to build their applications.

*Maintenance and support for the community supported assets* : Radius can provide the necessary tools and services to maintain and support the community supported assets. This will help the community to contribute, maintain the assets and provide support to the users who are using the assets.

**Solution in Radius**

1. Resource extensibility for defining the custom resource types in Radius
1. Recipes for the custom resource types
1. Community supported resource type definitions
1. Community supported Recipes
1. Radius auto generates AWS, Azure Recipes from the definitions (Recipes for any resource) 

> We will cover the design and user experience for all the above solutions except for "Recipes for any resource" in this document to keep the scope of the work simple.

Reviewer: Add this to non-goals 👍 - I knew we'd think of something.

#### Specify the contract for the key services in the application platform

As a platform engineer, I want to provide the custom platform with the following: 

*Resource schema authoring*: Define a schema for the custom resource types that my application uses in Radius. The schema defines the structure and properties of the custom resource type. 

> *Auto guidance for schema authoring*: The resource schema authoring tool provides auto guidance and validation to help the user author the schema. The auto guidance tool provides suggestions and recommendations to the user based on the schema that they are authoring. 

Reviewer: Is auto guidance something like copilot?

Author: Yes was thinking it as Intellisense in VSCode

Reviewer: if that's the case can we simplify this text to be more specific? As-written it makes me think we're building something new/special that's specific to Radius.

Author: rephrased this as auto-completion

*Consistency and uniformity in the schema*: The authored resource schema is consistent and uniform across all the custom resource types that the user defines.

**Solution in Radius**

*Schema authoring format*

| Schema Format | Why chose? | Why not to chose? | 
|---------------|------------|-------------------|
| Typespec | Developer friendly; Maintenance and upgrades are easier; Errors and guidance violations at development time  | Microsoft developed language; May not be widely adopted by the cloud-native communities ; Yet another language to adopt | 
| OpenAPI YAML/JSON | More common and standard format across the open-source communities ; K8s CRD's follow the structure of Open API  | Managing versions and ensuring backward compatibility is challenging |

*User groups and their needs*

There are two types of users that we need to cater to:
1. Users who are new or comfortable with experimenting a new schema format typespec
1. Users who are familiar with openAPI schema format and are proficient in defining the schema in YAML/JSON format

> Hence, we need to support both the schema formats in Radius to support both user groups.

Reviewer: I'd like to dig into this when we discuss more about versioning.

*User experience*

1. Deb is a platform engineer at Contoso open to use typespec and wants to author a custom resource Plaid in Radius

    Pre-requisites: User has typespec compiler/CLI installed

    1. Deb uses the radCLI to scaffold a template typespec definition

        ```bash
        rad resource-provider init contoso --template-kind typespec
        ```
        A sample plaid.tsp file and manifest files are created in the application folder with all the typespec dependencies installed.

>         Question :Can we build on top of `tsp init` which is used to set up a typespec project with a sample template? The other option is to use `rad resource-provider new` to scaffold a template typespec definition and the user takes care of the typespec dependencies and setup which might be a confusing.

Reviewer: I think we could definitely use `tsp init`.

    1. Deb authors the schema for plaid in typespec format
        
        ```
        import "@typespec/http";
        import "@typespec/rest";
        import "@typespec/openapi3";
        import "@typespec/versioning";

        using TypeSpec.Http;
        using TypeSpec.Rest;
        using TypeSpec.Versioning;

        @service({title: "Contoso"})
        @server("http://contoso.plaid.com", "endpoint for plaid service")
        @versioned(Versions)
        namespace Contoso;

        @route("/planes/radius/Contoso.Messaging")
        namespace plaid {
            model plaid {
                name:string;
                description:string;
                queue:string;
            }
        }

>         ```

Reviewer: I really really like where this is going.

    1. VSCode Type spec extension warns Deb on the errors and warnings as he types
     
        ![alt text](images/errors.png)

    1. Deb uses intellisense to autocomplete the schema and properties

        ![alt text](images/intellisense.png)

    1. Deb chooses a version for the schema

        ```
        import "@typespec/http";
        import "@typespec/rest";
        import "@typespec/openapi3";
        import "@typespec/versioning";

        using TypeSpec.Http;
        using TypeSpec.Rest;
        using TypeSpec.Versioning;

        @service({title: "Contoso"})
        @server("http://contoso.plaid.com", "endpoint for plaid service")
        @versioned(Versions)
        namespace Contoso;

        @route("/planes/radius/Contoso.Messaging")
        namespace plaid {
            model plaid {
                name:string;
                description:string;
                queue:string;
            }
        }

        enum Versions {

>             v1,

Reviewer: nit: our versions are **dates**.

        }
        ```
   1. Deb registers the schema in Radius
    
        ```bash

>         rad resource-provider register contoso --template-kind typespec -e myenv -v v1

Reviewer: nit: I think we'll probably register all versions as a unit, rather than each separately.

        ```

    1. Amy adds a version for the schema

         ```
        namespace: 'Applications.Datastores'
        apiVersion: 'v1'
        scope: '/planes/radius/Applications.Datastores'
        resourceTypes:
            'Applications.Datastores/postgreSQL':
                name: 'Name of the resource'
                description: 'PostgreSQL' 
                properties: 
                required: ['host', 'env', 'secrets']
                host:
                    type: 'string'
                    description: 'Hostname'
                env:
                    type: 'string'
                    description: 'Radius environment'
                app:
                    type: 'string'
                    description: 'Radius application'
                secrets:
                    connectionstring:
                    type: 'string'
                    description: 'Connection string for PostgreSQL'
        ```
   1. Amy registers the postgreSQL schema to an existing provider in Radius
    
        ```bash
        rad resource-type add -rp Applications --template-kind yaml -e myenv -v v1
        ```
        

>         Radius complies the schema and registers the custom resource type Plaid in UCP

Reviewer: I really like this example too!

>         Question : Will Applications continue to be a resource provider to accept new resource types ? 

Reviewer: I don't totally get the question, so I'm guessing. I think you might be asking about the use of the `Applications` namespace. 

I think we'd tell users that `Applications.Xyz` is reserved for the official Radius project. That doesn't stop users from breaking the rules, but it does make it clear what the expectations are.

Author: Yeah the question is around the use of existing namespace `Applications` and will we continue to accept new types  like postgreSQL?

Reviewer: So are you asking what our process would be for accepting a contribution like that? I think that's an important topic. Want to take a stab at it?

Author: During the design review, we agreed to move the open-sourcing and contributions experience to a separate document.

   
#### Iterating and testing the application platform

>  As a platform engineer, I want to provide a productive inner loop for development and testing the application platform. Simple and easy way to iterate on changes, test and deploy them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 As a platform engineer, I need a productive inner loop for development and testing the application platform. Simple and easy way to iterate on changes, test and deploy them
```

    ```json
    {
        "experimentalFeaturesEnabled": {
            "extensibility": true,
            "extensionRegistry": true,
            "dynamicTypeLoading": true
        },
        "extensions": {
            "radius": "br:biceptypes.azurecr.io/radius:latest",
            "aws": "br:biceptypes.azurecr.io/aws:latest"
            "Contoso": "br:biceptypes.azurecr.io/contoso:latest"
        }
    }
    ```
    
1. Create a app.bicep with plaid resource type

    ```bicep
    param plaidName string
    param plaidDescription string
    param plaidQueue string

    resource plaid 'Contoso.Messaging/Plaid@v1' = {
        name: plaidName
        description: plaidDescription
        queue: plaidQueue
    }
    ```
1. Deb uses the rad CLI to deploy the application with the custom resource type Plaid

    ```bash
    rad deploy app.bicep 
    ```
    The application is deployed with the custom resource type Plaid in Radius. Deb can iterate on the changes, compile and test the application with the custom resource type.

> 

Reviewer: I think this is really really excellent.
